Controlling the Level of Challenge for Gameplay Aspects
-------------------------------------------------------

Different people enjoy games like Spacebase DF9 in different ways.
Building the base is a huge part of the game's gameplay, and some
players wish to do *only* that in a nearly pure sandbox style.  Some
might enjoy trade, others might find it tedious.  And so on.  There are
several of these distinct "Gameplay Aspects", that different players
might prefer to one degree or another:

  * Building
  * Combat
  * Discovery
  * Sociology
  * Trade
  * Story

I suppose there must exist players who would wish to focus on one of
these to the exclusion of all the others.  More generally, our players
will want some mix of these aspects, but perhaps weighting one or two
more strongly than the others.


== Challenge Levels ==

Let's call this per-Aspect weighting measurements "Challenge Levels",
with scores varying from 0 to 6.  These affect the game's difficulty:

  0  Disabled
  1  Trivial
  2  Standard
  3  
  4  Hard
  5  
  6  Impossible

A game with all aspects set to 2 should give an enjoyable experience for
a new player.  Skilled players will prefer to dial things up on one or
two aspects, for example setting Building up to 5 and Combat to 3 if
they wish to mostly focus on building out a defensive base.

The Challenge Level setting for an aspect can be used to influence a
number of game parameters.  For example, the number, strength, and
frequency of raiders should obviously be controlled by the Combat
setting.  At high levels (3-5), the player can expect invasion fleets,
boarding parties, and strongly defended derelicts.  They will need to
hone their security teams and employ good tactics to survive.  Level 6
should be unplayable but within reason:  One or two of our most highly
skilled players might be able to survive this setting if they're lucky
and have extremely tight gameplay.

Challenge Level 1 is provided as a way to allow players to really tone
down an aspect of the game they dislike, without removing it entirely
from the game.  For example, players that dislike having to manage crew
morale might set Sociology to 1, which would slow morale drops and
reduce the number of friends and enemies a character makes; effectively
it greatly reduces the likelihood of fist fights and freak outs, and
makes it significantly easier to fix such problems.

Challenge Level 0 effectively disables the given aspect.  Not only are
the game effects completely removed, but related UI bits should be
largely disabled or hidden as well.  If Combat is turned off, then the
roster should not list a Security role, the build menu should not
provide turrets, and attack/defense technologies should not appear in
the Research menu.


== Difficulty Triggers ==

Challenge Levels can be controlled in two ways.

First, is at the start of the game; the base location selection sets the
default initial levels.  Level 0 can only be set from game start.

Second, in-game mechanisms are provided which allow the player to morph
gameplay as they go.  In this way, we allow the player to immerse
themselves in the game before requiring them to decide what type of game
they wish to play, and we acquire the player's choice in as unabtrusive
a way as possible.  We do this via player-selected game states, which
we'll call "Difficulty Triggers".  These can come in a variety of forms,
for example:

  * Researching certain technologies
  * Events that offer "road less traveled" type options
  * Building certain structures
  * Building a threshold number objects
  * Employing >N crew to a role for a threshold period
  * Failing to do adequant amounts of the above

So for example, if a player is disproportionately researching combat
technology and has pincushioned her base with turrets, and has established
two or more squads of Security forces, these are all strong indications
she is battle-thirsty, and the game should oblige by incrementing the
challenge level up to 4.  If she handily defeats the adversaries we
throw at her, knock it up to 5.

As another example, a merchantile representative appears in an Event
offering to establish a trading partnership.  The player can use the
dialogs to indicate their complete disinterest in trade (thereby
decrementing the level to 1) or agree to do some ordinary trading
(level 2).  The event could also have an option for a weird response,
like bribing the representative or returning his head on a platter
stuffed with Baconite, igniting a trade war (and thus upping the Trade
Challenge Level appropriately).

Challenge Levels should be allowed to go down as well as up.  This way
the game can morph itself to better suit novice gamers.  If the player
has Combat set to default but is suffering one defeat after another, and
hasn't built a single turret, we might dial combat down to 1.  A player
who continually refuses trade offers may be indicating a desire to shut
that down.


== Implementation Plan ==

Some parts of this concept will be easier to implement than others, so
this functionality should be rolled out incrementally.  For example,
being able to disable game elements (Challenge Level 0) will involve
making UI and large swaths of the game more configurable than they are
currently, so this could be left to be done later.

So, we'll break development up into six phases, which we'll delve into
below.

Trade is a new feature we're introducing, so effectively we've been at
Trade Challenge Level 0 to date.  As we implement this feature, we can
build up the feature to account for levels 0, 1, 2, and 3 from the get
go.  Trade Challenge Levels 4-6 probably would benefit from waiting
until we have some game testing experience for this system under our
belts, so we can collect ideas on how to up the engagement of it.

Story is kind of a unique Aspect in that it is not really a "measurable"
thing like morale levels, Baconite tallies, or number of raiders.  In a
way, it's also the most complex to code.  Dialing down the Story level
should be obvious enough - simplify object descriptions to remove
background, tone down crew commentary, and genericize events.
Increasing the story level needs to have the effect of making the game
more "rich" and to interweave plotlines that the character can follow.
What this should look like and how it should be developed, will need a
lot more brainstorming.


Phase A: Initialization
=======================
* Introduce a Game table for tracking the six Challenge Levels.
  It should be possible to access and modify these levels from most
  areas of the codebase.

* Challenge Levels are implemented as floating point values that range
  from 0.00 to 6.00.

* Initially, the Challenge Levels are set as follows:

  Building-2
  Combat-2
  Discovery-1
  Sociology-2
  Trade-1
  Story-1

* This phase presents a simplified form of our overall concept.  We
  implement a few Challenge Level modifications that should be
  straightforward to implement within the existing rules framework, and
  that address tweakables that players are already requesting:

  Combat-3: Researching LaserRifles, ArmorLevel2, or TeamTactics
  increases Combat by 0.5 each.  There is also an early-on event that
  the player can give an aggressive answer to which increments by 0.75.
  At 3.0, the number of raiders is increased, and hostile
  encounters occur more frequently.  The fleet invasion Event will not
  occur unless the Combat Challenge Level is at least 3.0.

  Sociology-1: Building Happy Fun Bot decrements the Sociology Challenge
  Level by 1.0.  At level 1.0, the morale loss rate is reduced; the goal
  of this is neutralizing morale management as a significant part of
  gameplay.

  Trade-2: Each fridge built increases the level by .25.  Researching
  Fridge v2.0 increments by 0.50.  There is also a new Event added which
  can increment by 0.50.  Reaching 2.0 causes trading activity to begin.

  Discovery-2: Each RevivaBed and Research Console built increases
  Discovery by .10.  Two new Events also include options which increment
  this, by 0.50 each.  Above Discovery Challenge Level 2.0, the
  frequency and severity of maladies is increased.


Phase B:  Trigger Infrastructure
================================
In this phase, we build infrastructure to allow more intricate
Difficulty Triggers, and expand our Challenge Levels to more fully
represent the bones of this system.

* For this phase, we start the game with all Challenge Levels initially
  set to 1:

  Building-1
  Combat-1
  Discovery-1
  Sociology-1
  Trade-1
  Story-1

* A Statistics table is established.  This tallies the number of each
  type of object built in the game.  So if the player builds a turret
  and then it gets destroyed and rebuilt, that tallies '2' even though
  only 1 turret is active.  Also, it tallies only for objects
  intentionally built; a turret found on a derelict does not count for
  this tally.

* Early-Game Difficulty Triggers

  +0.5 Building when first AirLock is activated
  +0.5 Building when first matter delivered to refinery
  +0.5 Building when first power reactor is built
  +0.5 Combat when first Security Squad established
  +0.5 Combat when first Raider killed
  +0.5 Sociology when first Immigrant approved
  +0.5 Sociology when first crewmember cured of a Malady
  +0.1 Sociology when first plant built
  +0.1 Sociology when first monitor built
  +0.1 Sociology when first shelf built
  +0.1 Sociology when first dresser built
  +0.1 Sociology when first rug built

* Mid-Game Difficulty Triggers

  +0.5 Building by researching GeneratorLevel2
  +0.5 Building by researching GeneratorLevel3
  +1.0 Building by researching GeneratorLevel4
  +0.5 Combat by researching LaserRifles
  +0.5 Combat by researching ArmorLevel2
  +0.5 Combat by researching TeamTactics
  +0.5 Combat when first Turret is built
  +0.75 Combat via Event
  +0.25 Trade per Fridge built
  +0.50 Trade via Event
  +0.10 Discovery per RevivaBed built
  +0.10 Discovery per Research Console built
  +0.50 Discovery via Event
  +0.50 Discovery via Event
  # TODO: More

* Difficulty Level Effects on Gameplay Aspects

  Building:

  1 - Seed Pod does not degrade.  Other objects degrade at half the
      normal Tight quarters procedures - Rooms, workstations, and
      objects can be used by double the normal number of crew.  Crew is
      fine with sleeping on bedroom floors.  Docking events increased in
      frequency.
  2 - Objects degrade at normal rate.  Seed Pod degrades like other
      objects, and the power it produces is reduced as its repair level
      diminishes.  Crew requires normal working spaces.
  3 - Seed Pod degradation is irreversable, so player needs to build
      their own power reactors fairly quickly.  Crew members demand good
      quarters and well-outfitted working spaces for working at top
      efficiency.  Meteor Events are more common, and will leave
      asteroid deposits on the game map; they are also more damaging to
      the station.  Docking and Derelict Events occur less frequently.
      If too much Oxygen is supplied, fires are more damaging.

  Combat:
  1 - Hostile events are very infrequent, and typically only involve one
      bad guy.  No hostile turrets.  No Parasites.  No invasion fleet.
  2 - Normal frequency for hostiles including Parasites.  The final game
      invasion fleet event does not occur, but there are some tougher
      hostile events that can occur as the game progresses.
  3 - Number and strength of raiders is increased.  Hostile encounters
      are more frequent.  The fleet invasion event is enabled.
  4 - Docking and derelict events are hostile more often, and the
      strength of raiders is higher.  The fleet invasion occurs sooner
      than at level 3, and involve more invaders with better defenses.

  Discovery:
  1 - Maladies that require research are encountered less frequently.
      Derelicts don't have Data Cubes.  
  2 - 
  3 - A number of severe Maladies are introduced

  Sociology:
  1 - Morale loss rates are halved for Stuff, Social, and Fun.
      Characters care less if other crew members die.  Maladies occur
      less frequently.
  2 - 
  3 - Racial intolerence is more severe, requiring more careful crew
      selection.  There should also be other sources for personality
      conflicts (team preferences, love interests, abrasiveness
      vs. thin-skinned, etc.)  There are more consequences to low morale
      measures - extreme hunger leads to cannibalism, low Stuff and Duty
      leads to theft, low Social and Fun leads to suicide, low Energy
      and Hunger leads to Malady affliction, etc.

  Trade:
  1 - Simple credits-for-matter system
  2 - Static trades for a few basic commodities.  Stable values and
      predictable trading.
  3 - Many more commodity options.  Fluctuating economy, with supply and
      demand causing price collapses and runs on necessity goods.

  Story:
  1 - Events are simplified
  2 - Events are more intricate with more meaningful choices to be
      made.  Crew chatter is more pertinent to ongoing plotlines.
  3 - Mysteries are intertwined throughout the game.  Choices are
      paramount to the gameplay, and relationships with and between
      characters are crucial to ensuring survival.  Characters remember
      much more about things that happen to them, and present the player
      with their needs and problems, their loves and hates, their
      opinions and feelings.


Phase C:
========
Game setup now provides mechanisms that allow the player to
intentionally select higher or lower Challenge Levels.

Continue fleshing out more Difficulty Triggers.

Add Combat-5.  This should be extremely challenging but still playable.
Should go beyond more than just upping the dials, and give the raiders
some sneaky or devastating tactics (e.g. formation attacks,
combined-arms attacks with raiders+turrets, identification of weak
spots, use of cover to avoid getting shot, etc.)

Define Challenge Levels 1-4 for most Aspects.

Add Trade-0, Sociology-0, and Combat-0, allowing disabiling these
aspects of the game entirely.  Ensure the relevant game objects, menu
items, and research topics are also disabled.


Phase D:  
========
Add Combat-6.  This needs to be nigh-impossible.

Challenge Levels 1-5 should be implemented for all Aspects.

Add Story-0.  This game setting effectively disables all backstory and
color from the game, for players that find it boring and just want pure
gameplay.  Events largely go away, in favor of a simple immigration
setting that controls the speed of new immigrants.

Add Building-0.  This is really only usable for 'canned' scenarios such
as invading an enemy stronghold, or a rescue mission on a
malady-afflicted vessel.


Phase E:  Feature-Complete
==========================
Goal is to get all Challenge Levels implemented for all Aspects, at
least roughly.

Discovery-0 turns off the Goals and Research menus, and disabled
Maladies entirely from the game.  Technologies are set at game
initialization.


Phase F:  Finishing
===================
Focus on polish, bug fixing, and balance tweaking.

